1918
October 29

Start of the German Revolution.
November 11

The Armistice with Germany marks the end of World War I. German troops evacuate occupied territories and Allied troops subsequently move in and occupy the German Rhineland.
December 27

Start of the Greater Poland Uprising against German rule.
1919
January 4–15

The Spartacist uprising takes place and is crushed by the German government, marking the end of the German Revolution.
January 18

Opening of the Paris Peace Conference to negotiate peace treaties between the belligerents of World War I.
January 31

Battle of George Square takes place in Glasgow, the British Army is called in to quell a strike for a 40 hour work week.

Detail from William Orpen's painting The Signing of Peace in the Hall of Mirrors, Versailles, 28th June 1919, showing the signing of the peace treaty by the German Minister of Transport Dr Johannes Bell, opposite to the representatives of the winning powers.
February

The Polish–Soviet War begins with border clashes between the two states.
March 2

Foundation of the Third International, or Comintern in Moscow. Comintern's stated aim is to create a global Soviet republic.
March 12

The Austrian Constituent National Assembly demands Austria's integration to Germany.[1]
March 21

Proclamation of the communist Hungarian Soviet Republic.
May 15

The Turkish War of Independence begins as Greek troops land in Smyrna.
June 28

Germany and the Allied powers sign the Treaty of Versailles after six months of negotiations. The German armed forces are limited in size to 100,000 personnel and Germany is ordered to pay large reparations for war damages. The United States signed the treaty but did not ratify it, later making a separate peace treaty with Germany.
July

An unknown corporal named Adolf Hitler infiltrates the German Workers' Party (the precursor of the Nazi Party) at the behest of the German Reichswehr.
August 1

Fall of the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic.
September 10

German Austria signs the Treaty of Saint-Germain. The peace treaty with the Allies regulates the borders of Austria, forbids union with Germany and German Austria has to change its name to Austria. The United States did not ratify the treaty and later makes a separate peace treaty with Austria.
September 12

Gabriele D'Annunzio leads a force of Italian nationalist irregulars in the seizure of the disputed city of Fiume (Rijeka).
November 27

Bulgaria signs the Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine. The peace treaty with the Allies regulates the borders of Bulgaria, the Bulgarian army is reduced to 20,000 men and Bulgaria is ordered to pay war reparations.
1920
January 10

Creation of the Free City of Danzig which was approved neither by Germany nor Poland.
January 21

The Paris Peace Conference comes to an end with the inaugural General Assembly of the League of Nations. Although one of the victors of World War I, the United States never joins the League.
March


Wolfgang Kapp, the leader of the Putsch
The failed right-wing Kapp Putsch takes place against the German government. The German military remains passive and the putsch is defeated by a general strike.
The German Ruhr Uprising, spurred by the general strike against the Kapp Putsch, is crushed by the German military
June 4

Hungary signs the Treaty of Trianon with the Allied powers. The treaty regulated the status of an independent Hungarian state and defined its borders. The United States did not ratify the treaty and later makes a separate peace treaty with Hungary.
August 10

Turkey signs the Treaty of Sèvres with the Allied powers (except the US, which never declared war on Turkey). The treaty partitions the Ottoman Empire and the Turkish armed forces are reduced in size. Greece did not accept the borders as drawn up in the treaty and did not sign it. The Treaty of Sèvres was annulled in the course of the Turkish War of Independence and the parties signed and ratified the superseding Treaty of Lausanne in 1923.
October

Żeligowski's Mutiny, a Polish force led by General Lucjan Żeligowski capture Vilnius, officially without support from the Polish state
November

Franklin D. Roosevelt is defeated for the office of Vice President of the United States by Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge.
December 24

Bloody Christmas: Italy occupies Fiume after five days of resistance from Gabriele D'Annunzio's legionnaires.
1921
March 7–17

Red Army mutineers and Russian civilians seize the strategic city of Kronstadt in the Kronstadt Rebellion, demanding expanded civilian rights and an end to the Bolshevik monopoly on Soviet politics. After several days and several thousand casualties, the rebellion is crushed by Bolshevik forces from neighboring Petrograd.
March 18

The Polish–Soviet War ends with the Peace of Riga.
April 24

The Fiuman electorate approves the idea of a Free State of Fiume.
August 25

The U.S.–German Peace Treaty and the U.S.–Austrian Peace Treaty are signed, marking the formal end of the state of war between the two states and the United States instead of the Treaty of Versailles and the Treaty of Saint-Germain that were not ratified by the United States.
August 29

The U.S.–Hungarian Peace Treaty is signed, marking the formal end of the state of war between the two states instead of the Treaty of Trianon that was not ratified by the United States.
November 9

Foundation of the Italian National Fascist Party by Benito Mussolini during the Third Fascist Congress in Rome.
1922
February 6

The Washington Naval Conference ends with the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty by the United Kingdom, the United States, Japan, France, and Italy. The signing parties agree to limit the size of their naval forces.
March

The first German officers travel to the Soviet Union for the purposes of military cooperation between Germany and the Soviet Union.
April 16

Germany and the Soviet Union sign the Treaty of Rapallo, re-establishing diplomatic relations, renouncing financial claims on each other and pledge future cooperation.
August 13

Gabriele D'Annunzio, one of Mussolini's rivals, falls out of a window (either pushed or fell while intoxicated), injuring him severely.
October

The Russian Civil War (ongoing since 7 November 1917) ends in Bolshevik victory with the defeat of the last White forces in Siberia.
October 11

Armistice of Mudanya is signed in the Turkish War of Independence.
October 29

Fascist leader Benito Mussolini is appointed prime minister of Italy by king Victor Emmanuel III after the March on Rome.
November 1

The Grand National Assembly of Turkey abolishes the Ottoman Sultanate.
1923
The Nationalist Kuomintang party and the Communist Party of China form the First United Front to end warlordism in China.
January 11

France and Belgium occupy the Ruhr in an effort to compel Germany to step up its payments of war reparations.
June

The great inflation of 1923, the value of the German mark is destroyed.
July 24

The Treaty of Lausanne, settling the boundaries of modern Turkey, is signed in Switzerland by Turkey and the Entente powers. It marks the end of the Turkish War of Independence and replaces the earlier Treaty of Sèvres.
August 31

The Corfu incident: Italy bombards and occupies the Greek island of Corfu seeking to pressure Greece to pay reparations for the murder of an Italian general in Greece.
September 27

The Corfu incident ends; Italian troops withdraw after the Conference of Ambassadors rules in favor of Italian demands of reparations from Greece.
October 29

Turkey officially becomes a Republic following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire.
November 8

The Beer Hall Putsch takes place, in which Adolf Hitler unsuccessfully leads the Nazis in an attempt to overthrow the German government. It is crushed by police the next day.
1924

Lenin and Stalin
January 21

Leader of the Soviet Union Vladimir Lenin dies, and Joseph Stalin begins purging rivals to clear the way for his dictatorship.
February 1

The United Kingdom extends diplomatic recognition to the Soviet Union.
March 16

Italy annexes the Free State of Fiume
April 1

Adolf Hitler is sentenced to 5 years in prison for his participation in the Beer Hall Putsch (he serves only 8 months).
April 6

Fascists win elections in Italy with a 2/3 majority.
June 10

Italian Fascists kidnap and kill socialist leader Giacomo Matteotti in Rome.
August 16

The Dawes Plan is accepted. It ends the Allied occupation of the Ruhr and sets a staggered payment plan for Germany's payment of war reparations.
August 18

France begins withdrawing its troops from the Ruhr in Germany.
1925
May 12

Retired Field Marshal Paul Von Hindenburg is elected President of Germany.
July 18

Hitler's autobiographical manifesto Mein Kampf is published.
December 1

The Locarno Treaties are signed in London (they are ratified 14 September 1926). The treaties settle the borders of western Europe and normalize relations between Germany and the Allied powers of western Europe.
1926
January 3

Theodoros Pangalos declares himself dictator of Greece.
January 31

British and Belgian troops leave Cologne, Germany.
April 4

Greek dictator Theodoros Pangalos is elected president.
April 24

The Treaty of Berlin is signed by Germany and the Soviet Union, which declares neutrality if either country is attacked within the next five years.
September 8

Germany joins the League of Nations.
December 25

Emperor Taishō dies and his son Hirohito becomes the Emperor of Japan.
1927
April 12

The Shanghai massacre of 300-5,000 communists, perpetrated by the Kuomintang, marks the end of the First United Front and the beginning of the Chinese Civil War.
May 20

Saudi Arabia and the United Kingdom sign the Treaty of Jeddah.
June 7

Peter Voikov, Soviet ambassador to Warsaw, is assassinated by a White movement activist.
November 12

Leon Trotsky is expelled from the Soviet Communist Party, leaving Joseph Stalin with undisputed control of the Soviet Union.
December 14

Iraq gains independence from the United Kingdom.
1928
May 3

The Jinan Incident begins, a limited armed conflict between the Republic of China and Japan.
May 28

Foundation of the Chinese Red Army.
June 4

Huanggutun Incident: Japanese agents assassinate the Chinese warlord Zhang Zuolin.
August 2

Italy and Ethiopia sign the Italo-Ethiopian Treaty, pledging cooperation and friendship.
August 27

The Kellogg-Briand Pact is signed in Paris by the major powers of the world. The treaty outlaws aggressive warfare.
October 1

The Soviet Union launches the first five-year plan, an economic effort to increase industrialization.
1929
February 9

Litvinov's Pact is signed in Moscow by the Soviet Union, Poland, Estonia, Romania and Latvia. The Pact outlaws aggressive warfare along the lines of the Kellog-Briand Pact.
February 11

Italy and the Holy See sign the Lateran Treaty, normalizing relations between the Vatican and Italy.
March 4

Herbert Hoover becomes President of the United States.
March 28

Japan withdraws troops from China, ending the Jinan Incident.
April 3

Persia signs Litvinov's Pact.
June 7

The Lateran Treaty is ratified, making the Vatican City a sovereign state.
July 24

The Kellogg-Briand Pact goes into effect.
August 31

The Young Plan, which sets the total World War I reparations owed by Germany at US$26,350,000,000 to be paid over a period of 58½ years, is finalized. It replaces the earlier Dawes Plan.
October 29

The Great Depression begins with the Wall Street Crash.
1930
April 22

The United Kingdom, United States, France, Italy and Japan sign the London Naval Treaty regulating submarine warfare and limiting naval shipbuilding.
June 30

France withdraws its remaining troops from the Rhineland ending the occupation of the Rhineland.
September 14

German election results in the Nazis becoming the second-largest party in the Reichstag.
1931
May 19

Launching of the first Deutschland-class cruiser, Deutschland. The construction of the ship causes consternation abroad as it was expected that the restriction of 10,000 tons displacement for these ships would limit the German Navy to coastal defense vessels, not ships capable of warfare on the open sea.
September 18

Mukden Incident: the Japanese stage a false flag bombing against a Japanese-owned railroad in the Chinese region of Manchuria, blaming Chinese dissidents for the attack, an incident that many claim is the official start of what would become the Second World War.
September 19

Using the Mukden Incident as a pretext, the Japanese invade Manchuria.
1932
The Soviet famine of 1932–33, also known as the Holodomor begins, caused in part by the collectivization of agriculture of the first five-year plan.
January 7

The Stimson Doctrine is proclaimed by United States Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson in response to Japan invading Manchuria. The Doctrine holds that the United States government will not recognize border changes that are made by force.
January 28

January 28 Incident: using a flare-up of anti-Japanese violence as a pretext, the Japanese attack Shanghai, China. Fighting ends on March 6, and on May 5 a ceasefire agreement is signed wherein Shanghai is made a demilitarized zone.
February 27

Fighting between China and Japan in Manchuria ends with Japan in control of Manchuria.
March 1

Japan creates the puppet state Manchukuo out of occupied Manchuria.
April 10

Paul von Hindenburg is reelected President of Germany, defeating Adolf Hitler in a run-off.
May 30

Chancellor of Germany Heinrich Brüning resigns. President Hindenburg asks Franz von Papen to form a new government.
July 25

Soviet–Polish Non-Aggression Pact is signed with it being initially effective for three years.
August 30

Hermann Göring is elected chairman of the German Senate.
November 21

President Hindenburg begins talking to Hitler about forming a new government.
December 3

Hindenburg names Kurt von Schleicher Chancellor of Germany.

1933
January 1

Defense of the Great Wall: Japan attacks the fortified eastern end of the Great Wall of China in Rehe Province in Inner Mongolia.
January 30

Hitler is appointed Chancellor of Germany by President Hindenburg.
February 27

Germany's parliament building the Reichstag is set on fire.
February 28

The Reichstag Fire Decree is passed, nullifying many German civil liberties.
March 4

Franklin Delano Roosevelt is inaugurated as President of the United States.
March 20

Germany's first concentration camp, Dachau, is completed.
March 23

The Reichstag passes the Enabling Act, making Adolf Hitler dictator of Germany.
March 24

Anti-Nazi boycott of 1933
March 27

Japan leaves the League of Nations over the League of Nations' Lytton Report that found that Manchuria belongs to China and that Manchukuo was not a truly independent state.
April 1

Germans are told to boycott Jewish shops and businesses.
April 26

The Gestapo secret police is established in Germany.
May 2

Hitler outlaws trade unions.
May 15

Official formation of the Luftwaffe, the German air force built in secret in violation of the Treaty of Versailles.
May 31

The Tanggu Truce is signed between China and Japan, setting the ceasefire conditions between the two states after the Japanese occupation of Manchuria. China accedes to all Japanese demands, creating a large demilitarized zone inside Chinese territory.
June 21

All non-Nazi parties are banned in Germany.
July 14

The Nazi party becomes the official party of Germany.
August 25

Haavara Agreement: The agreement was designed to help facilitate the emigration of German Jews to Palestine.
September 12

Leó Szilárd conceives the idea of the nuclear chain reaction.
October 19

Germany leaves the League of Nations.
November 24

Homeless, alcoholic, and unemployed sent to Nazi concentration camps.
1934

The unfortunate Englelbert Dollfus
January 26

Germany and Poland sign the 10 year German-Polish Non-Aggression Pact.
February 12–16

The Austrian Civil War is fought, ending with Austrofascist victory.
February 9

Balkan Pact, a military alliance is signed between Greece, Turkey, Romania and Yugoslavia
March 20

All German police forces come under the command of Heinrich Himmler.
May 5

Soviet–Polish Non-Aggresion Pact is extented to December 31, 1945.

"Long knives" victim Ernst Röhm with Hitler, August 1933
June 30

Night of the Long Knives in Germany. Potential rivals to Hitler within the Nazi Party, including SA leader Ernst Röhm and prominent anti-Nazi conservatives such as, former Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher, are killed by the SS and the Gestapo.
July 20

The SS becomes an organization independent of the Nazi Party, reporting directly to Adolf Hitler.[2]
July 25

Austrian Nazis assassinate Engelbert Dollfuss during the failed July Putsch against the Austrian government.
August 2

Upon the death of President Hindenburg, Hitler makes himself Führer of Germany, becoming Head of State as well as Chancellor.
August 8

Members of the Wehrmacht begin swearing a personal oath of loyalty to Hitler instead of to the German constitution.
September

The Soviet Union joins the League of Nations.
October 16

Beginning of the Long March where the Chinese Red Army retreats to evade the pursuit of the Kuomintang forces.
December 1

Sergey Kirov, head of the Leningrad communist party, is murdered by an unknown assailant, precipitating a wave of repression in the Soviet Union.
December 5

The Abyssinia Crisis begins with the Walwal incident, an armed clash between Italian and Ethiopian troops on the border of Ethiopia.
December 29

Japan renounces the Washington Naval Treaty and the London Naval Treaty.

1935
January 7

The League of Nations approves the results of the Saar plebiscite, which allows Saar to be incorporated into German borders.[3]
June 18

The Anglo-German Naval Agreement is signed by Germany and the United Kingdom. The agreement allows Germany to build a fleet that's 35% the tonnage of the British fleet. In this way, the British hope to limit German naval rearmament.
August 31

The Neutrality Act of 1935 is passed in the United States imposing a general embargo on trading in arms and war materials with all parties in a war and it also declared that American citizens traveling on ships of warring nations traveled at their own risk.
September 15

The Reichstag passes the Nuremberg Laws, institutionalizing discrimination against Jews and providing the legal framework for the systematic persecution of Jews in Germany.
October 3

Italy invades Ethiopia, beginning the Second Italo–Abyssinian War. League denounces Italy and calls for an oil embargo that fails.[4]
November 14

Final British General election for over a decade. Stanley Baldwin replaces Ramsay MacDonald as Prime Minister.
1936
January

George V, King of the British Empire, is euthanized by his doctors. David, Prince of Wales becomes King Edward VIII.
February 6

Germany hosts the 1936 Winter Olympics in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Bavaria.
March 7

In violation of the Treaty of Versailles, Germany seizes the Rhineland.
After the Rhineland move Hitler met separately with French journalist Bertrand de Jouvenal and British analyst Arnold J. Toynbee emphasizing his limited expansionist aim of building a greater German nation, and his desire for British understanding and cooperation.[5]
King Edward VIII, over the head of the Baldwin Government, orders the military to stand down in relation to the move.
March 25

The Second London Naval Treaty is signed by the United Kingdom, United States, and France. Italy and Japan each declined to sign this treaty.
May 5

Italian troops march into the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, marking the end of the Second Italo–Abyssinian War.
June 3

Luftwaffe Chief of Staff General Walther Wever loses his life in an air crash, ending any hope for the Luftwaffe to ever have a strategic bombing force similar to the Allies.
July 17

The failed Spanish coup of July 1936 by Nationalist forces marks the beginning of the Spanish Civil War.
August 1

Germany hosts the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin.
October

The Great Purge commences in the Soviet Union with widespread repression of suspected opponents of the regime. The purge leads to the imprisonment and death of many military officers, weakening the Soviet Armed Forces ahead of World War II.
October 18

Göring is made head of the German Four Year Plan, an effort to make Germany self-sufficient and increase armaments.
November 14

Suiyuan Campaign begins as Japanese-backed Mongolian troops attack the Chinese garrison at Hongort.
November 15

The aerial German Condor Legion goes into action for the first time in the Spanish Civil War in support of the Nationalist side.
November 25

The Anti-Comintern Pact is signed by Japan and Germany. The signing parties agree to go to war with the Soviet Union if one of the signatories is attacked by the Soviet Union.
December 1

Hitler makes it mandatory for all males between the ages 10-18 to join the Hitler Youth.
December 12

Kuomintang marshal Zhang Xueliang kidnaps Chinese leader Chiang Kai-Shek in order to compel the Kuomintang to make a truce with the Chinese Communist party for the purpose of fighting the invading Japanese.
Edward VIII is forced to abdicate and is succeeded by Albert, Duke of York, who assumes the name King George VI
December 23

The first 3,000 men of the Italian expeditionary force (later named Corpo Truppe Volontarie) lands in Cadiz in support of the Nationalist side in the Spanish Civil War.
December 24

The Second United Front is formed between the Chinese Communist party and the Kuomintang, temporarily suspending the Chinese Civil War for the sake of fighting the Japanese.
1937
January 20

President Roosevelt begins his second term.
May 28

Neville Chamberlain becomes Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
July 7

The Marco Polo Bridge Incident occurs, beginning the Second Sino-Japanese War.
August 13

Second Sino-Japanese War: Battle of Shanghai commences.
October 5

President Roosevelt gives the Quarantine Speech outlining a move away from neutrality and towards "quarantining" all aggressors.
November 6

Italy joins the Anti-Comintern Pact.
November 26

Second Sino-Japanese War: Battle of Shanghai ends in Japanese victory as Chinese forces evacuate the city.
December 1

Second Sino-Japanese War: Battle of Nanking commences as Japanese forces attack the city.
December 8

Japan established the puppet state of Mengjiang in the Inner Mongolia region of the Republic of China.[6]
December 11

Italy leaves the League of Nations.
December 12

The USS Panay incident occurs, where Japan attacked the American gunboat Panay while she was anchored in the Yangtze River.
December 13

Second Sino-Japanese War: start of the Rape of Nanking following Japanese victory in the Battle of Nanking.
1938
January 26

The Allison incident occurs further straining relations between Japan and the United States.
March 6

Japanese troops reach the Vietnam River in Bucu aera in Vietnam.[7]
March 13

Austria is annexed by Germany.
March 24

Second Sino-Japanese War: Battle of Taierzhuang commences. The battle ends with Chinese victory on 7 April after intense house-to-house fighting inside the city of Taierzhuang.
Second Sino-Japanese War: Battle of Xuzhou begins, and ends in Japanese victory on May 1 as Chinese troops break out from the encircled city.
July 6–16

Évian Conference: The United States and the United Kingdom refuse to accept any more Jewish refugees.
July 29

The Soviet–Japanese border conflicts begin with the Battle of Lake Khasan.
August

Soviet Union wins the Battle of Lake Khasan against Japan.
September 27

U.S. President Roosevelt sends a letter to German Führer Adolf Hitler seeking peace.[8]
September 30

The Munich Agreement is signed by Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and Italy. The agreement allows Germany to annex the Czechoslovak Sudetenland area in exchange for peace in an attempt to appease Hitler.

From left to right: Chamberlain, Daladier, Hitler, Mussolini, and Ciano pictured before signing the Munich Agreement, which gave the Sudetenland to Germany.
Also in 1938, the Polish government opportunistically undertook a hostile action against the Czechoslovak state as weakened by the Munich Agreement and annexed a small piece of territory on its borders.
October 5

Germany invalidates the passports of all its Jewish citizens who are reissued passports with the letter "J" stamped in red. This change was made after requests by Sweden and Switzerland who wanted a way of easily denying Jews entry into their countries.[2][3]
November 7

Polish Jew Herschel Grynszpan mortally wounded German consular aide Ernst vom Rath in Paris.[9]
November 9

Following vom Rath's death, the Kristallnacht pogrom begins in Germany; thousands of Jewish shops and synagogues are smashed, looted, burned, and destroyed throughout the country.[10]
1939

World powers in 1939, before the war.
January 25

A uranium atom is split for the first time at Columbia University in the United States.[11]
January 27

Hitler orders Plan Z, a 5-year naval expansion programme intended to provide for a huge German fleet capable of defeating the Royal Navy by 1944. The Kriegsmarine is given the first priority on the allotment of German economic resources. This is the first and only time the Kriegsmarine is given the first priority in the history of the Third Reich.
March 14

The pro-German Slovak Republic is created.
Carpatho-Ukraine is created, which Hungary invades that same day.
March 15

Germany occupies and annexes Bohemia and Moravia-Silesia in violation of the Munich Agreement. The Czechs do not attempt to put up any organized resistance, having lost their main defensive line with the annexation of the Sudetenland.
Germany establishes the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. The Second Czechoslovak Republic is dissolved.
March 16

Hungary annexes the Carpatho-Ukraine.
March 20

German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop delivers an oral ultimatum to Lithuania, demanding that it cede the Klaipėda Region (German name Memel) to Germany.
March 21

Hitler demands the return of the Free City of Danzig to Germany.
March 23

German–Romanian Treaty for the Development of Economic Relations between the Two Countries is signed.
Germany annexes the Klaipėda Region.
Germany and Slovakia sign the Treaty on the protective relationship between Germany and the Slovak State, creating the German Zone of Protection in Slovakia.
The Slovak–Hungarian War begins.
March 31

The United Kingdom and France offer a guarantee of Polish independence.
The Slovak–Hungarian War ends.
April 1

The Spanish Civil War ends in Nationalist victory. Spain becomes a dictatorship with Francisco Franco as the head of the new government.
April 3

Hitler orders the German military to start planning for Fall Weiss, the codename for the attack on Poland, planned to be launched on August 25, 1939.
April 4

Hungary and Slovakia sign the Budapest Treaty, handing over a strip of eastern Slovak territory to Hungary.
April 7–12

Italy invades Albania with little in the way of military resistance. Albania is later made part of Italy through a personal union of the Italian and Albanian crown.
April 14

U.S. President Roosevelt sends letter to German Chancellor Hitler and Italian Prime Minister Mussolini seeking peace.[12]
April 18

The Soviet Union proposes a tripartite alliance with the United Kingdom and France. It is rejected.[13]
April 28

In a speech before the Reichstag, Hitler renounces the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the German–Polish Non-Aggression Pact
May 11

Soviet–Japanese border conflicts: The Battle of Khalkhin Gol begins with Japan and Manchukuo against the Soviet Union and Mongolia. The battle ends in Soviet victory on September 16, influencing the Japanese not to seek further conflict with the Soviets, but to turn towards the Pacific holdings of the Euro-American powers instead.
May 17

Sweden, Norway, and Finland reject Germany's offer of non-aggression pacts.
May 22

The Pact of Steel, known formally as the "Pact of Friendship and Alliance between Germany and Italy", is signed by Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. The Pact declares further cooperation between the two powers, but in a secret supplement the Pact is detailed as a military alliance.
June 14

The Tientsin Incident occurs, in which the Japanese blockade the British concession in the North China Treaty Port of Tientsin.
July 10

Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain reaffirms support for Poland and makes it clear that Britain did not view Free City of Danzig as being an internal German-Polish affair and would intervene on behalf of Poland if hostilities broke out between the two countries.
August 2

The Einstein-Szilárd letter is sent to President Roosevelt. Written by Leó Szilárd and signed by Albert Einstein, it warned of the danger that Germany might develop atomic bombs. This letter prompted action by Roosevelt and eventually resulted in the Manhattan Project.
August 23

The Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact is signed between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, with secret provisions for the division of Eastern Europe – joint occupation of Poland and Soviet occupation of the Baltic States, Finland and Bessarabia. This protocol removes the threat of Soviet intervention during the German invasion of Poland.
August 25

In response to a message from Mussolini that Italy will not honor the Pact of Steel if Germany attacks Poland, Hitler delays the launch of the invasion by five days to provide more time to secure British and French neutrality.
August 30

German ultimatum to Poland concerning the Polish Corridor and the Free City of Danzig.
September 1

Without response to its ultimatum, Germany invades Poland, start of World War II (the Soviet Union invades Poland on September 17).
1: The Republic of China and the Empire of Japan are involved in the early stages of the third year of armed conflict between them during the Second Sino-Japanese War. The war is in what will be known as the "Second Period", which starts after the fall of Wuhan in October 1938 and ends in December 1941 with Pearl Harbor. This conflict will eventually be swept up into World War II when Japan joins the Axis and China joins the Allies.[1]
1: The invasion of Poland by Germany starts at 4:45 a.m. when the Kriegsmarine's battleship Schleswig-Holstein opens fire on the Polish military transit depot at Westerplatte in the Free City of Danzig on the Baltic Sea, but the attack is repulsed.[2] At the same time the Luftwaffe attacks several targets in Poland, among them Wieluń, the first town in the war to be carpet bombed by the Germans.[3] Shortly before 6:00 a.m., the German Army passes the Polish border in great numbers from north and south, together with Slovak units.[4][5] In the same day, the Free City of Danzig is annexed by Germany. Resisters entrenched in the city's Polish Post Office are overwhelmed.[6][2]
1: The Italian government announces that it will maintain a condition of "non-belligerence" in the conflict.[7]
1: Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Latvia and Estonia as well as Romania immediately declare their neutrality.[8][9]
1: The House of Commons of the United Kingdom passes an emergency military budget.[10]
1: The British government declares general mobilization of the British Armed Forces and starts evacuation plans in preparation of German air attacks.
1: Acting on account of their governments, the ambassadors of France and Britain demand the German government to cease all hostile activities and to withdraw its troops from Poland.[11]
2: Right after Britain, the French Parliament also approves an emergency war budget.[12]
2: The British and French governments agree on presenting an issue a ultimatum to Germany the following day.[13]
2: The Swiss government orders a general mobilization of its forces.
2: The Irish State's Dáil Éireann approves a state of emergency, paving the way to legislation that vastly enhances the government's powers.[14]
2: The French Army begins its general mobilization.[15]
3: At 9:00 a.m. the British ambassador to Berlin Ivan Henderson is instructed by the Cabinet to deliver an ultimatum to Germany which expired without answer at 11:00 a.m.[16] As a result at 11:15 a.m. British Standard Time (BST) the Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain announces that Britain is at war with Germany.[17]
3: The National Service (Armed Forces) Act 1939 is approved and enforces full conscription in the British Armed Forces on all able-bodied males between 18 and 41 resident in the UK.[18][19]
3: In Britain, Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain forms a new war ministry with a smaller and more powerful war cabinet within composed of nine ministers (Chamberlain, Sir Samuel Hoare, Sir John Simon, Lord Halifax, Leslie Hore-Belisha, Sir Kingsley Wood, Lord Chatfield, Lord Hankey and Winston Churchill).[20]
3: The British Viceroy of India Lord Linlithgow also declares war on Germany without consulting Indian nationalists.[21]
3: The Australian Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies declares that the country is at war with Germany due to Britain choice and a similar war declaration against Germany is done by New Zealand's government.[22]
3: At 12:00 p.m. the French Government delivers a similar final ultimatum to Germany which at 5:00 p.m. also expires unanswered, thus bringing France in the war.[23]
3: Within hours of the British declaration of War, SS Athenia, a British cruise ship en route from Glasgow, UK, to Montreal, Canada is torpedoed by the German submarine U-30 250 miles (400 km) Northwest of Ireland. 112 passengers and crew members are killed. The "Battle of the Atlantic" starts.[24]
3: Bromberg massacre: many ethnic German civilians are killed in the Polish city of Bromberg.
3: Ireland's Taoiseach Éamon de Valera declares the neutrality of his nation.[25]
3: Netherlands and Belgium declare their neutrality.[8]
3: The Polish destroyer ORP Wicher and the minelayer ORP Gryf are sunk in the Polish port of Hel by the Luftwaffe, making them the first warships to be sunk in the war.[26]
4: At 8:00 a.m. Newfoundland Standard Time (NST), Dominion of Newfoundland declares war on Germany.
4: In Poland the Third German Army from East Prussia links with units from German Western Pomerania, thus covering the Danzig Corridor.[11]
4: In the first British offensive action of the war, the Royal Air Force launch a raid on the German fleet in the Heligoland Bight. They target the German pocket-battleship Admiral Scheer anchored off Wilhelmshaven at the western end of the Kiel Canal. Several aircraft are lost in the attack and, although the German vessel is hit three times, all of the bombs fail to explode.
4: Japan's Prime Minister Nobuyuki Abe announces its country's neutrality in the European situation.[27]
4: The British Admiralty announces the beginning of a naval blockade on Germany, one of a range of measures by which the British will wage economic warfare on the Axis powers.
4: Spain's caudillo Francisco Franco states that he will observe "strict neutrality" in the conflict.[28]
4: Lithuania proclaims its neutrality in the conflict.[9]
4: The South African Prime Minister Barry Hertzog motion to remain neutral in the war is defeated in the Assembly 80 votes against 67. At this point, Hertzog goes to the Governor-General Patrick Duncan and asks him to call a new election, which Duncan refuses.[22]
5: Duncan calls on the politician Jan Smuts to attempt to form a Cabinet and replace Hertzog as Prime Minister of South Africa, which he successfully does.[22]
5: The Kingdom of Yugoslavia states its neutrality.[29]
5: The United States publicly declares neutrality.[30] On the same day the American President Franklin D. Roosevelt orders to put together a Neutrality Patrol which must observe and report any belligerent forces by patrolling the United States Atlantic coast and the Caribbean.[31]
6: South Africa, now under Prime Minister Jan Smuts, declares war on Germany.[32]
6: Battle of Barking Creek, a friendly fire incident, results in the first RAF fighter pilot fatality of the war.[33]
6: The German army occupies Kraków in the south of Poland; Polish army is in general retreat.
7: France's commander in chief general Maurice Gamelin begins a limited offensive into the German Saarland territory involving ten divisions.[34]
7: The National Registration Act 1939 is passed in Britain introducing identity cards and allowing the government to control labour.
8: The British Government announces the re-introduction of the convoy system for merchant ships and a full-scale blockade on German shipping.
9: The French Saar Offensive stalls at the heavily mined Warndt Forest having advanced approximately 8 miles (13 km) into lightly defended German territory.
10: After passing both Houses of the Canadian parliament by unanimous consent Canada's Prime Minister W. L. Mackenzie King declares war on Germany.[22]
10: Warsaw is hit for the first time by bombing raids. In just that single day twelve raids target the city.[35]
10: The first submarine is sunk in the conflict when the British submarine HMS Triton mistakenly takes for an U-boat the British submarine HMS Oxley and torpedoes it, leaving only two survivors.[36][37]
11: Viceroy of India Lord Linlithgow announces to the two houses of the Indian Legislature (the Council of State and the Legislative Assembly) that due to India's participation in the war, the plans for the Federation of India under the Government of India Act 1935 will be indefinitely postponed.
12: General Gamelin orders to halt to the French Saar Offensive into Germany after having taken only a handful of villages.[34]
13: The French Navy suffers its first casualties in Casablanca, Morocco, when the minelaying cruiser Pluton explodes due to an accident killing 215 people.[38]
14: British Destroyers escorting the aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal sink the U-39 after the U-boat's torpedoes against the carrier didn't explode. All crew members were rescued and taken prisoner. It was the first sinking of a German U-boat in WW II.[39]
15: The Polish Army is ordered to hold out at the Romanian border until the Allies arrive.[40]
15: The Kingdom of Bulgaria formally announces its neutrality.[41]
16: The German Army complete the encirclement of Warsaw.
17: The Soviet Union invades Poland from the east, occupying the territory east of the Curzon line as well as Białystok and Eastern Galicia.[42]
17: The British aircraft carrier HMS Courageous is torpedoed and sunk by U-29 on patrol off the coast of Ireland, causing the death of 514 aboard; it represented the first major warship to be sunk in the war.[39]
17: The Imperial Japanese Army launches attacks on the Chinese city of Changsha, when their forces in northern Jiangxi attacked westward toward Henan.
18: Polish President Ignacy Mościcki and Commander-in-Chief Edward Rydz-Śmigły leave Poland for Romania, where they are both interned; Russian forces reach Vilnius and Brest-Litovsk. Polish submarine escapes from Tallinn; Estonia's neutrality is questioned by the Soviet Union and Germany.
19: The German and Soviet armies link up near Brest Litovsk.
19: Soviet Union blockades the harbour of Tallinn, the capital of Estonia.
18: The French Army completes it's sixteen-day long mobilization.[15]
19: The Japanese Imperial Army attacks the Chinese National Revolutionary Army along the Xinqiang River using poison gas during the Battle of Changsha.
20: German submarine U-27 is sunk with depth charges from the British destroyers HMS Fortune and HMS Forester.
21: Romanian Prime Minister Armand Călinescu is assassinated by the Iron Guard, an ultra-nationalistic group in Romania.
23: The Imperial Japanese Army drive the Chinese National Revolutionary Army out of the Xinqiang River area, and the 6th and 13th Divisions cross the river under artillery cover and advances further south along the Miluo River during the Battle of Changsha.
24: Soviet air force violates Estonian airspace. The Estonians negotiate with Molotov in Moscow. Molotov warns the Estonians that if the Soviet Union doesn’t get military bases in Estonia, it will be forced to use "more radical actions".
25: German home front measures begin with food rationing.
25: At the opening in Panama City of the Pan-American conference of ministers of foreign affairs the U.S. Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles asks for their support of a Patrol Zone covering the Americas.[31]
25: Soviet air activity in Estonia. Soviet troops along the Estonian border include 600 tanks, 600 aircraft and 160 000 men.
26: Following a massive artillery bombardment, the Germans launch a major infantry assault on the centre of Warsaw.
26: Russian bombers seen in the Tallinn sky.
26: The Luftwaffe attacks the Home Fleet between Scotland and the Skaggerak with limited success; on the occasion a Dornier Do 18 is shot down by a Fleet Air Arm Blackburn Skua from the aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal, making it the first German plane shot down by the British.[43][44]
26: Germany's Führer, Adolf Hitler, orders the pocket battleships Deutschland and Admiral Graf Spee to go on a long-range rampage in the Atlantic against allied shipping, the former going to the Northern Atlantic and the latter to the Southern.[45]
27: In the first offensive operations by the German Army in Western Europe, guns on the Siegfried Line open up on villages behind French Maginot line. [46]
28: German–Soviet Frontier Treaty is signed by Molotov and Ribbentrop. The secret protocol specifies the details of partition of Poland originally defined in Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact (August 23, 1939) and adds Lithuania to the Soviet Union sphere of interest.
28: The remaining Polish army and militia in the centre of Warsaw capitulate to the Germans.
28: Soviet troops mass by the Latvian border. Latvian air space violated.
28: Estonia signs a 10-year Mutual Assistance Pact with the Soviet Union, which allows the Soviets to have 30 000-men military bases in Estonia. As a gift in return Stalin promises to respect Estonian independence.
29: The Japanese Imperial Army reaches the outskirts of Changsha. However, it is unable to conquer the city because its supply lines are cut off by the Chinese National Revolutionary Army.
30: Captain Lagsdorff's Admiral Graf Spee sinks its first merchant ship, the British freighter SS Clement while off the coast of Brazil.[47]
30: French forces on the French-German border fall back to the Maginot Line in anticipation of a German invasion.[48]
October
1: Latvian representatives negotiate with Stalin and Molotov. Soviets threaten an occupation by force if they do not get military bases in Latvia.
2: The Declaration of Panama is approved by the American republics. Belligerent activities should not take place within waters adjacent to the American continent. A neutrality zone of some 300 miles (480 km) in breadth is to be patrolled by the U.S. Navy.[31]
3: British forces move to the Belgian border, anticipating a German invasion of the West.
3: Lithuanians meet Stalin and Molotov in Moscow. Stalin offers Lithuania the city of Vilnius (in Poland) in return for allowing Soviet military bases in Lithuania. The Lithuanians are reluctant.
4: The French forces retreat from the Saarland in Germany, and return behind the Maginot Line.[34]
5: Latvia signs a 10-year Mutual Assistance Pact with the Soviet Union, which allows the Soviets to have 25,000 men in military bases in Latvia. Stalin promises to respect Latvian independence.
6: Chinese army reportedly defeats the Japanese at the Battle of Changsha.
6: Polish resistance in the Polish September Campaign comes to an end. Hitler speaks before the Reichstag, declaring a desire for a conference with Britain and France to restore peace.
9: Germany issues orders (Case Yellow) to prepare for the invasion of Belgium, France, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.
9: The German cruiser Deutschland seizes the American freighter SS City of Flint and its crew, accusing them of contraband. Led by a prize crew the ship is ordered to go to Germany, causing a diplomatic incident with the United States and igniting American public opinion.[49][50]
10: The last of Poland's military surrenders to the Germans.
10: The leaders of the German navy suggest to Hitler they need to occupy Norway.
10: British Prime Minister Chamberlain declines Hitler's offer of peace.
10: Lithuania signs a 15-year Mutual Assistance Pact with the Soviet Union, which allows the Soviets to have 20,000 men in military bases in Lithuania. In a secret protocol, Vilnius is made Lithuanian territory.
11: An estimated 158,000 British troops are now in France.
12: Adolf Eichmann starts deporting Jews from Austria and Czechoslovakia into Poland.
12: French Premier Édouard Daladier declines Hitler's offer of peace.
12: Finland's representatives meet Stalin and Molotov in Moscow. Soviet Union demands Finland give up a military base near Helsinki and exchange some Soviet and Finnish territories to protect Leningrad against Great Britain or the eventual future threat of Germany.
13: In the midst of the night the U-47 under the command of Günther Prien infiltrates in the Scapa Flow harbour and sinks the British battleship HMS Royal Oak, killing 833 crewmen.[39]
14: Finns meet Stalin again. Stalin tells that "an accident" might happen between Finnish and Soviet troops, if the negotiations last too long.
16: First air attack on Great Britain, aimed at ships in the Firth of Forth, Scotland.[51]
18: First Soviet forces enter Estonia. During the Umsiedlung, 12,600 Baltic Germans leave Estonia.
19: Portions of Poland are formally inducted into Germany; the first Jewish ghetto is established at Lublin.
20: The "Phoney War": French troops settle in the Maginot line's dormitories and tunnels; the British build new fortifications along the "gap" between the Maginot line and the Channel.
20: Pope Pius XII's first encyclical condemns racism and dictatorships.
21: Registration begins in the United Kingdom in order to conscript all able-bodied males between 18 and 23.[19]
27: Belgium announces that it is neutral in the present conflict.
28: Hitler, worried on one side of the protests received by the American and Norwegian governments and on the other of the danger of losing a warship with such a prestigious name, orders the Deutschland to return home.[52]
30: The British government releases a report on concentration camps being built in Europe for Jews and anti-Nazis.[53]
31: As Germany plans for an attack on France, German Lieutenant-General Erich von Manstein proposes that Germany attack through the Ardennes rather than through Belgium – the expected attack route.
November
1: Parts of Poland, including the Danzig Corridor, are annexed by Germany. Soviet Union annexes the eastern parts of occupied Poland to Ukraine and Belorussia.
3: Finland and Soviet Union again negotiate new borders. Finns mistrust Stalin's aims and refuse to give up territory breaking their defensive line.
4: The U.S. Neutrality Act is passed: the French and British may buy arms, but on a strictly cash basis. American isolationists find the act an "outrage."
4: A German physicist working at Siemens AG sends an anonymous letter to the British Embassy in Oslo offering Britain a report on present and future German weapons technologies.
8: Hitler escapes a bomb blast in a Munich beerhall, where he was speaking on the anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch of 1923. British bombers coincidentally bomb Munich.
13: Negotiations between Finland and Soviet Union break down. Finns suspect that Germans and Russians have agreed to include Finland in the Soviet sphere of influence.[54]
13: The first British destroyer lost in the war is the HMS Blanche, sunk by a minefield laid by an u-boat close to the Thames Estuary.[55]
13: The Deutchland arrives home at Gotenhafen, after having only sunk two ships and caught one.[56][54]
14: The Polish government-in-exile moves to London.
16: The first British civilian casualty occurs when a German bomber kills James Isbister in an air raid on Orkney in Scotland.[57]
17: The IRA is blamed for bombs set off in London.
20: The Luftwaffe and German U-boats start mining the Thames estuary.
21: The new German strategy of planting magnetic mines in the British seas obtains its first major success when a mine planted by the U-52 in the Firth of Forth put the light cruiser HMS Belfast out of service until the autumn of 1942.[58]
21: The Luftwaffe and German U-boats start mining the Thames estuary.
21: The German battleships Gneisenau and the Scharnhorst are sent out to relive pressure on the Admiral Graf Spee by bringing havoc on the shipping routes.[49]
23: The German battleships Gneisenau and the Scharnhorst sink the British armed merchant cruiser HMS Rawalpindi between Iceland and the Faroe Islands.[58] About 270 crewmen die, while only 38 survive.[59]
23: Polish Jews are ordered to wear Star of David armbands.
24: Japan announces the capture of Nanning in southern China.
26: The Soviets stage the shelling of Mainila, Soviet artillery shells a field near the Finnish border, accusing Finns of killing Soviet troops.
29: The USSR breaks off diplomatic relations with Finland.
30: The Soviet Union attacks Finland in what would become known as the Winter War. [60]
December
1: Russia continues its war against Finland; Helsinki is bombed. In the first two weeks of the month, the Finns retreat to the Mannerheim line, an outmoded defensive line just inside the southern border with Russia.
2: The Red Army takes Petsamo.[61]
4: The British battleship HMS Nelson is incapacitated for six months by yet another magnetic mine left this time by the U-52 off the Loch Ewe.[58][62]
5: The Russian invaders begin heavy attacks on the Mannerheim line. The Battles of Kollaa and Suomussalmi begin.
7: Italy again declares its neutrality. Norway, Sweden, and Denmark also proclaim their neutrality in the Russo-Finnish quarrel.
11: The Russians meet with several tactical defeats by the Finnish army.
12: The destroyer HMS Duchess sinks after a collision with the battleship HMS Barham off the coast of Scotland with the loss of 124 men.
13: The Battle of the River Plate off Montevideo, Uruguay. A British naval squadron attacks the Admiral Graf Spee.
14: The Graf Spee retreats, badly damaged, into Montevideo harbor. [63]
14: The USSR is expelled from the League of Nations in response to the Soviet invasion of Finland on November 30.[64]
15: Soviet Army assaults Taipale, Finland during the Battle of Taipale.[65]
17: The Graf Spee is forced by International Law to leave Montevideo harbor; it is scuttled just outside the harbor. Its captain, Hans Langsdorff, is interned. [63]
18: The first Canadian troops arrive in Europe.
18: Germany defeats Britain in the Battle of the Heligoland Bight.
20: Captain Hans Langsdorff commits suicide.
27: The first Indian troops arrive in France.
28: The British Minister of Food W.S. Morrison announced that starting January 8, rationing would be expanded to include butter, bacon, ham and sugar.[66]
28: While patrolling the Butt of Lewis the British battleship HMS Barham is damaged by the German U-30 and put out of service for four months.[67][68]
31: German Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels makes a radio address reviewing the official Nazi version of the events of 1939. No predictions were made for 1940 other than saying that the next year "will be a hard year, and we must be ready for it."[69]
January
1: 10,000 Japanese troops launch a counter-attack in eastern Shanxi Province in China in an attempt to relieve the nearly-surrounded Japanese 36th Division.[1]
2: The Soviet offensive in Finland is halted by several Finnish victories; numerous Soviet tanks are destroyed.
7: Rationing of basic foodstuffs is established in the UK.[2]
A major Finnish victory at Suomussalmi is reported; one whole Soviet division is eliminated, and again numbers of military vehicles are captured.
7: General Semyon Timoshenko takes command of Soviet Army forces in Finland.[1]
10: Mechelen incident: a German plane, carrying plans for Fall Gelb, crashes in neutral Belgium.
16: Captured documents reveal Hitler's plans for the invasion of Scandinavia and a postponement of the invasion of France and the Low Countries until the spring, when the weather is more compatible for an invasion.
17: The Soviets are driven back in Finland and retaliate with heavy air attacks.
20: German submarine U-44 torpedoes and sinks Greek steamer Ekatontarchos Dracoulis off Portugal at 0415 hours, killing 6. U-44 had been hunting for Ekatontarchos Dracoulis for the past 6 hours.[1]
21: A U-boat sinks British destroyer HMS Exmouth and its crew of 135 are all lost.
24: Reinhard Heydrich is appointed by Göring for the solution to the "Jewish Question."
27: Germany makes final plans for the invasion of Denmark and Norway.
February

Finnish ski troops in Northern Finland January 12, 1940.
1: The Japanese Diet announces a record high budget with over half its expenditures being military.
5: Britain and France decide to intervene in Norway to cut off the iron ore trade in anticipation of an expected German occupation and ostensibly to open a route to assist Finland. The operation is scheduled to start about March 20.
9: Erich von Manstein is placed in command of German XXXVIII (38) Armour Corps, removing him from planning the French invasion.
10: USSR agrees to supply grain and raw materials to Germany in a new trade treaty.
14: British government calls for volunteers to fight in Finland.
15: The Soviet army captures Summa, an important defence point in Finland, thereby breaking through the Mannerheim Line.
Hitler orders unrestricted submarine warfare.
16: British destroyer HMS Cossack forcibly removes 303 British POWs from the German transport Altmark in neutral Norwegian territorial waters, sparking the Altmark Incident.
17: The Finns continue retreat from the Mannerheim Line.
Manstein presents to Hitler his plans for invading France via the Ardennes forest.
21: General Nikolaus von Falkenhorst is placed in command of the upcoming German invasion of Norway.
March
1: Adolf Hitler directs his generals in planning the invasion of Denmark and Norway.
3: Soviets start attacks on Viipuri, Finland's second largest city.
5: Finland tells the Soviets they will agree to their terms for ending the war. The next day they send emissaries to Moscow to negotiate a peace treaty.
11: Meat rationing starts in Britain.[2]
12: In Moscow, Finland signs a peace treaty with the Soviet Union after 105 days of conflict. The Finns are forced to give up significant territory in exchange for peace.
16: German air raid on Scapa Flow causes first British civilian casualties.
18: Hitler and Mussolini meet at the Brenner pass on the Austrian border;[2] Benito Mussolini agrees with Hitler that Italy will enter the war "at an opportune moment".
21: Paul Reynaud becomes Prime Minister of France following Daladier's resignation the previous day.
28: Britain and France make a formal agreement that neither country will seek a separate peace with Germany.
29: The Soviets want new territories. Molotov speaks to the Supreme Soviet, about "an unsettled dispute", the question of Romanian Bessarabia.
30: Japan establishes a puppet regime at Nanking, China, under Wang Jingwei.
30: Britain undertakes secret reconnaissance flights to photograph the targeted areas inside the Soviet Union in preparation for Operation Pike, utilising high-altitude, high-speed stereoscopic photography pioneered by Sidney Cotton.
April
April: 22,000 Polish officers, policemen, and others are massacred by the Soviet NKVD in the Katyn massacre.
3: The Ministerial Defence Committee, with the First Lord of the Admiralty (Winston Churchill) as its chair, replaces Lord Chatfield's ministerial position of Minister for Coordination of Defence.
9: Germans land in several Norwegian ports and take Oslo; the Norwegian Campaign lasts two months. The British start their Norwegian Campaign. Denmark is invaded and surrenders in six hours. The German heavy cruiser Blücher is sunk at the Battle of Drøbak Sound.
10: Germans set up a Norwegian government under Vidkun Quisling, former minister of defence.
The German light cruiser Königsberg is sunk by British Fleet Air Arm dive bombers.
11: First Battle of Narvik. British destroyers and aircraft successfully make a surprise attack against a larger German naval force. A second attack on April 13 will also be a British success.
12: British troops occupy the Danish Faroe Islands.
14: British and French troops start landing at Namsos, north of Trondheim in Norway.
15: British troops land at Harstad, near Narvik, Norway.
16: More British landings in Norway, notably north and south of Trondheim; the struggle for Trondheim continues until the 22nd.
27: British troops start pull-out from central Norway, north and south of Trondheim.
May

The state of the Allies (blue), and the Axis powers (black) with the Soviet Union (red) aligned with Nazi Germany, in May 1940.

The German Blitzkrieg offensive of mid-May, 1940.

Map of the British invasion of Iceland in mid-May 1940.
1: Allies begin evacuating Norwegian ports; the efforts will continue until June.
5: Norwegian government in exile established in London.[2]
8: Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain barely survives Norway Debate vote in the House of Commons.
9: Conscription in Britain extended to age 36.
10: Germany invades Belgium, France, Luxembourg and the Netherlands; Winston Churchill becomes Prime Minister of the United Kingdom upon the resignation of Neville Chamberlain. The United Kingdom invades Iceland.
Belgium declares a state of emergency. Churchill is called on to form a wartime coalition government.[2]
The massive German offensive against the Western front: The invasion of Luxembourg, Belgium, the Netherlands, and France begins. In a bold stroke, German paratroops capture the Belgian fort Eben Emael.
10: The Battle for The Hague becomes the first failed paratrooper attack in history as the Dutch quickly defeat the invaders.
11: Luxembourg is occupied.
Churchill offers the former Kaiser Wilhelm II, who is now living in the Netherlands, asylum in the United Kingdom; he declines.
12: The Belgians blow up all the bridges over the Meuse River to halt the German advance.
12: Battle of Hannut begins in Belgium.
13: Dutch government-in-exile established in London.
General Heinz Guderian's Panzer corps breaks through at Sedan, France.
Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands flees to asylum in the United Kingdom.
Churchill's "blood, toil, tears, and sweat" speech in Commons.
13: The Dutch lose the Battle of the Grebbeberg to the Germans.
14: The creation of the Local Defence Volunteers (the Home Guard) is announced by the new Secretary of State for War Anthony Eden. It is mostly composed of the elderly and retired.
Churchill asks President Roosevelt and Canada for aid in these dark days. Outlines of the new British coalition, which includes Labour, Liberal, and Conservative members, is made public.
14: The Dutch defeat the Germans at the Battle of the Afsluitdijk.
14: The Rotterdam Blitz led to German success in the Battle of Rotterdam, while causing many civilian deaths and tremendous damage. The Netherlands decided to surrender with the exception of Zealand.
15: The capitulation of the Dutch army is signed.[2]
In a response to the Rotterdam Blitz, the first large-scale strategic bombing of World War II targets Gelsenkirchen, followed by Hamburg, Bremen, Cologne, Essen, Duisburg, Düsseldorf and Hanover during the next days.
German forces cross over the Meuse River.[2]
16: Churchill visits Paris and hears that the French war is as good as over.
16: The Belgian government leaves Belgium for Bordeaux in France, as the Belgian army retreats. It later moves to London.[3]
17: Germans enter Brussels and also take Antwerp.
Paul Reynaud forms new French government, including 84-year-old Marshal Pétain, the French hero of World War I.
18: Maxime Weygand replaces Maurice Gamelin as commander of the French armed forces.
Antwerp captured.[2]
18: Germans win the Battle of Zeeland.
19: Amiens in France is besieged by German troops; Rommel's forces surround Arras; other German forces reach Noyelles on the Channel.
19: The British complete their invasion of Iceland.
20: General Guderian's Panzer groups take Abbeville, threatening Allied forces in the area.
23: Oswald Mosley, leader of the pre-war British fascists, is jailed; he and his wife will spend the duration in prison.
24: The British make a final decision to cease operations in Norway.
25: The Allied forces, British and French alike, retreat to Dunkirk.[2] Hitler orders a halt to the advance of Germans toward the Allied beachhead and allows Hermann Göring to use the Luftwaffe to attack. British R.A.F. defends the beachhead.
Sporadic Luftwaffe bombings in England.
Boulogne-sur-Mer surrenders to the Germans.
25: Soviet Union is preparing a total takeover in the Baltic States organizing and staging conflicts between the Baltic States and the USSR. Soviet government accuses Lithuania of kidnapping Soviet soldiers.
25-28: 86 Belgian civilians are murdered by German forces in the village of Vinkt.
26: The Patrol vessel A4 arrives in Plymouth, evacuating the final 40 tonnes of national gold reserves out of Belgium.
26: Calais surrenders to the Germans.
Operation Dynamo, the Allied evacuation of 340,000 troops from Dunkirk, begins. The move will last until June 3 under ferocious bombardment by the Luftwaffe.
28: Belgium surrenders to the Germans; King Leopold III of Belgium surrenders and is interned.
30: Crucial British Cabinet meeting: Churchill wins a vote on continuing the war, in spite of vigorous arguments by Lord Halifax and Chamberlain.
31: The Japanese heavily bomb Nationalist capital Chungking, on the upper Yangtze.
June
3: Last day of Operation Dynamo. 224,686 British and 121,445 French and Belgian troops have been evacuated.
Germans bomb Paris.
4: Winston Churchill delivers his, "We shall never surrender", speech to the House of Commons.
7: German battleships Gneisenau and Scharnhorst sink the aircraft carrier HMS Glorious and two destroyers off Norway; the British ships have had no air cover.
9: Red Army provokes conflicts on the Latvian border.
10: Italy declares war on France and the United Kingdom. Norway surrenders. King Haakon and his government had evacuated to Britain three days previously. French government decamps to Tours.
11: The Siege of Malta begins.
12: More than 10,000 British soldiers of the 51st (Highland) Division are captured at Saint-Valéry-en-Caux.
13: French government moves again, this time to Bordeaux.[2]
14: Paris occupied by German troops; Elements of the French Navy (Marine Nationale) based in Toulon carried out offensive operations against Italian targets along the Ligurian coast.
A total military blockade on the Baltic States by the Soviet Baltic Fleet. Soviet troops along the Baltic borders are ready to organise communist coups in the Baltic States. Soviet bombers shoot down a Finnish passenger airplane Kaleva flying from Tallinn to Helsinki and carrying three diplomatic pouches from the U.S. legations in Tallinn, Riga and Helsinki.
15: Eight-hour ultimatum to surrender is given to Lithuania by the Soviets. President Smetona escapes from the country so the takeover is not possible to do in a formally legal way. Soviet troops enter Lithuania and attack Latvian border guards.
Start of the evacuation of British troops from ports in western France in Operation Ariel.
16: Philippe Pétain becomes premier of France upon the resignation of Reynaud's government.
The French sloop La Curieuse forces the Italian submarine Provano to surface and then sinks it by ramming.
Soviet Union gives eight-hour ultimatum to Latvia and Estonia to surrender.
17: Sinking of liner RMS Lancastria off St Nazaire while being used as a British troopship— at least 3,000 are killed in Britain's worst maritime disaster.
Soviet troops enter Latvia and Estonia.
18: General De Gaulle forms the Comité français de la Libération nationale, a French government in exile; Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are occupied by the Soviet Union.
20: The French seek an armistice with the Italians.[4]
21: Franco-German armistice negotiations begin at Compiègne.
Elements of two Italian armies cross into France during Italian invasion of France.
21: The French battleship Lorraine opened fire on the Italian port of Bardia in Italian North Africa. During some of the last actions of the French against the Italians, French naval aircraft attacked Taranto and Livorno in mainland Italy.
21: Soviet-led coups in the Baltic States. In the only military resistance in Tallinn, 2 die on Estonian side and about 10 on the Soviet side.
22: Franco-German armistice signed.
24: Franco-Italian armistice signed.
25: France officially surrenders to Germany at 01:35.
Last major evacuation of Operation Ariel; 191,870 Allied soldiers, airmen and some civilians had escaped from France.
26: The Soviet Union send an ultimatum demanding Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina from Romania.
27: Romanians propose negotiations. Molotov replies that the demands are land concessions or war. New ultimatum from the Soviets to the Romanians.
28: General De Gaulle recognised by British as leader of Free French.
Marshal Italo Balbo, Commander-in-Chief of Italian North Africa, is accidentally killed in a "friendly fire incident" by Italian anti-aircraft fire at Tobruk, Libya.
28: The Red Army occupies Romanian Bessarabia and the northern part of Bukovina.
28: The Luftwaffe bombs the demilitarised British Channel Islands, they had not been informed of the demilitarization. In Guernsey, 33 are killed and 67 injured, in Jersey, 9 are killed and many are injured.
28: Axis and Allied convoys clash south-west of Crete.
30: Germany invades the Channel Islands.
July
1: Channel Islands occupation is completed by German forces.
: French government moves to Vichy.
: Marshal Rodolfo Graziani is named as Balbo's replacement in North Africa.
: The Italian Royal Air Force starts bombing the British Mandate of Palestine.
2: Hitler orders preparation of plans for invasion of Britain, code-named Operation Sea Lion.
2: Alderney surrenders to the Germans.
2: Brighton beach is closed to the public and mines, barbed wire and other defences are put into place.
3: Cardiff is bombed by the Luftwaffe for the first time.
3: The British attack and destroy the French navy, fearing that it would fall into German hands.
4: The destruction of the French Fleet at Mers-el-Kébir, Algeria by the Royal Navy; Vichy French government breaks off diplomatic relations with Britain in protest. At Alexandria the French agree to demilitarise the French battleship Lorraine and several smaller ships.
The Duke of Windsor (tainted by suspicion of pro-Nazism) is named governor of the Bahamas, putting him some distance from controversy.
4: Sark surrenders to the Germans. The Germans now control all of the British Channel Islands.
4: The German News Bureau released excerpts of the documents captured during the fall of France relating to Operation Pike, an Anglo-French plan to bomb Soviet oil fields. The compromised operation was subsequently aborted.
4: The Italians capture Kassala
5: Two Belgian politicians, Camille Huysmans and Marcel-Henri Jaspar, form an unofficial government in exile in London, afraid that the official Belgian government, still in France, will surrender to the Germans.
9: A fairly indecisive naval skirmish happens off the coast of Italy. No ships are lost.
10: The Battle of Britain begins with Luftwaffe raids on channel shipping.
President Roosevelt asks Congress for huge increases in military preparations.
11: RAF raids on enemy emplacements in the Netherlands and on German munitions factories.
12: Luftwaffe attacks on Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
14: Soviets organize rigged elections in the Baltic States. The parliaments will be in the control of the Soviets.
16: Adolf Hitler submits to his military the directive for the invasion of the United Kingdom, Operation Sea Lion.
18: In response to Mers-el-Kébir, the Vichy French Air Force bombs British-held Gibraltar.
19: General Johan Laidoner of Estonia is deported to Siberia.
19: Allied ships clash with two Italian light cruisers, sinking one in the Battle of Cape Spada.
21: Czechoslovak government in exile arrives in London.
In the Baltic States Soviet controlled parliaments request membership of USSR.
22: The Havana Conference meets; the nations of the Western hemisphere meet to discuss neutrality and economic cooperation.
Fumimaro Konoye is named the Prime Minister of Japan.
23: The British "Home Guard" is officially established, drawing on elderly men and those considered unable to serve in the regular armed forces.
25: All women and children are ordered to evacuate Gibraltar.
26: The United States of America activates the General Headquarters (GHQ), United States Army, which is designed to facilitate mobilization by supervising the organization and training of the army field forces within the continental United States, which is code named the Zone of the Interior.
30: The President of Estonia, Konstantin Päts, is arrested and deported to Russia by the Soviets.
August
August: The so-called Spéngelskrich ("War of Pin-badges") begins in occupied Luxembourg as civilians wear patriotic lapel badges prominently, in defiance of Nazi attempts to "Germanize" the territory.
1: Hitler sets 15 September as the date for Operation Sea Lion, the invasion of Britain.
: Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov reaffirms Molotov-Ribbentrop pact in the Soviet Supreme while verbally attacking both Britain and the USA. He also asserts that the boundaries of the Soviet Union are moved to the shores of the Baltic Sea.
: The Italian Royal Navy establishes its BETASOM submarine base in Bordeaux and joins the "Battle of the Atlantic."
1-4: Operation Hurry, the first of the Malta Convoys, is accomplished.
2: General Charles de Gaulle sentenced to death in absentia by a French military court.
: The USSR annexes Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina.
3: The USSR formally annexes Lithuania.
4: Italian forces under General Guglielmo Nasi invade and occupy British Somaliland during the East African Campaign.
5: Failure to achieve air superiority and bad weather in the Channel results in a postponement of the invasion of Great Britain.
: The USSR formally annexes Latvia.
6: The USSR formally annexes Estonia.
11-15: Battle of Tug Argan fought in British Somaliland during the Italian invasion. To avoid encirclement, the British withdraw.
13: This is "Adler Tag" or "Eagle Day". Hermann Göring starts a two-week assault on British airfields in preparation for invasion. (For some German historians, this is the beginning of the "Battle of Britain.")
14: British scientist Sir Henry Tizard leaves for the United States on the Tizard Mission, giving over to the Americans a number of top secret British technologies including the magnetron, the secret device at the heart of radar. Radar is already proving itself in the defence of Britain.
15: RAF victories over the Luftwaffe continue, in a wide-ranging fight along the East coast. British fighter aircraft production begins to accelerate.
: Sinking of the Greek cruiser Elli by an Italian submarine on 15 August 1940 at the harbour of Tinos.
16: The Battle of Britain continues; Germans are hampered by poor aircraft range and British extensive use of RADAR.
: A first draft of the Destroyers for Bases Agreement by the US and Britain is made public.
17: Hitler declares a blockade of the British Isles.
18: Heavy fighting in the Battle of Britain; Germans suffering severe losses on bomber formations. Göring declares cowardice among his fighter pilots and orders them to closely guard the bombers, further restricting their capabilities.
19: Italian forces take Berbera, the capital of British Somaliland and the British defenders flee to Aden. The fall of Berbera completes the invasion of the British colony. By the end of the month, the Italians control British Somaliland and several towns and forts along the border with Sudan and Kenya including Kassala, Gallabat, and Moyale.
20: Italy announces a blockade of British ports in the Mediterranean area.
: Churchill's speech "Never was so much owed by so many to so few" speech delivered to the House of Commons.
20: Chinese Communists launch the Hundred Regiments Offensive against the Japanese in North China.
22: Germans are now shelling Dover and the nearby coastal area with long-range artillery.
24: German aircraft mistakenly bomb a church in Cripplegate, accidentally dictating the future shape of the Battle of Britain.
25: Churchill orders the bombing of Berlin in retaliation for the previous night's bombing of Cripplegate.
26: Both London and Berlin are bombed, Berlin for the first time.
27: Douala in French Cameroon is captured, and soon afterwards the entire colony is captured as well
30: The bombing of England continues; London is now bombed in retaliation for the bombing of Berlin; thus, the beginning of "the London Blitz."
: Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini dictated the so-called Second Vienna Award which forced Romania to hand over the Northern Transylvania (including the entire Maramureș and part of Crișana) to Hungary.
31: Luftwaffe attacks on British airfields continue, as well as on London. Attacks on Radar installations prove ineffective.
31: Two Royal Navy destroyers are sunk off the Dutch coast in the so-called "Texel Disaster".
September
2: The Destroyers for Bases Agreement is completed. Britain obtains 50 destroyers in exchange for giving the United States land grants in various British possessions for the establishment of US naval and air bases, on ninety-nine-year rent-free leases on bases in the Bahamas, Antigua, St. Lucia, Trinidad, Jamaica, and British Guiana.
3: Hitler postpones the invasion of Britain, as the Luftwaffe fails to break the British defenses. However, fears of the forthcoming invasion continue to haunt Britain.
6: King Carol abdicates the Romanian throne in favour of his son Michael while control of the government is taken by Marshal Antonescu.
7: In one of the major misjudgements of the war, the Luftwaffe shifts its focus to London, away from the RAF airfields. Success may be measured only in the estimated 2,000 civilian dead. Other British cities are hit. The Blitz starts
9: During the Western Desert Campaign, Italian colonial forces in Libya under General Mario Berti launch the invasion of Egypt. The first objective is to advance from defensive positions within Libya to the border with Egypt.
: Tel Aviv in the British Mandate of Palestine is bombed by Italian aircraft causing 137 deaths.
10: Operation Sea Lion is now set for 24 September.
: The Italian Air Corps is formed to fight in the Battle of Britain.
13: After re-taking Fort Capuzzo just inside Libya, Italian colonial forces cross the border and advance into Egypt. The Italians take the small port of Sollum, but the only resistance to the invasion is a light British screening force which withdraws as the Italians advance.
14: Operation Sea Lion is postponed until 27 September, the last day of the month with suitable tides for the invasion.
15: Massive German bombing flights on English cities; most are driven off. The RAF begins to claim victory in the Battle of Britain.
16: Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 introduces the first peacetime conscription (this time for men between 21 and 35) in United States history.
The Italian invasion of Egypt comes to a halt when approximately five Italian divisions set up defensively in a series of armed camps after advancing about 95 km (59 mi) to Sidi Barrani. The Italians never approach the main British positions at Mersa Matruh.
17: Decoded messages now reveal that Hitler has postponed Operation Sea Lion until further notice.
18: Radio Belgique, a French and Dutch language radio service of the BBC, begins broadcasting to occupied Belgium from its base in London.[5]
22: Heavy convoy losses to U-boats in the Atlantic.
The Japanese occupy French Indochina; local French administrators become only figurehead authorities.
23: Free French and British forces attempt a landing at Dakar, French West Africa; Vichy French naval forces open fire sporadically for two days, and the expedition is called back.
24: Berlin suffers a large bombing raid by the RAF.
: In response to Dakar, the Vichy French Air Force bombs Gibraltar for the first time since 18 July.
25: Vichy French aircraft return to Gibraltar for a second day of bombings.
: Japanese 5th Division march into Hanoi, French Indochina.
27: The Tripartite Pact is signed in Berlin by Germany, Italy, and Japan, promising mutual aid. An informal name, "Axis", emerges.
28: Vidkun Quisling becomes head of state in Norway.
October
1-31: The United States separates the Corps Areas established in 1921 to perform the administrative tasks of the various regions of the US from the four Field Armies that had been established in 1932.
1: Chinese Nationalist and Chinese Communists fight each other in southern China. Meanwhile Japanese forces have a setback at Changsha.
2: The bombing of London continues throughout the month.
3: Warsaw's Jews are directed to move into the Warsaw ghetto.
4: Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini meet at the Brenner Pass to discuss the prospects in the war.
7: Responding to a Romanian request made on 7 September, Germany deploys a military mission to Romania to provide training for the Romanian Army and guard the Romanian oilfields.
9: Neville Chamberlain resigns from the House of Commons for health reasons; Winston Churchill is elected head of the Conservative Party.
12: Any German invasion of Britain is postponed until spring 1941 at the earliest.
12: The Royal Navy clash with and defeat several Italian ships which attacked them after a convoy mission to Malta.
13: British civilians are still being killed by German bombs though the attacks have dropped off significantly.
14: Balham station disaster. German bomb pierces 32 feet underground killing 66 people.[6]
15: Clarence Addison Dykstra becomes Director of Selective Service in the United States.
15: Mussolini and his closest advisers decide to invade Greece.
16: Draft registration begins in the United States.
19: The Italians bomb Bahrain.
20: Italian aircraft bomb Cairo, Egypt and American-operated oil refineries in the British Protectorate of Bahrain.
21: Liverpool is bombed for the 200th time.
23: Adolf Hitler meets with Franco at Hendaye, near the Spanish-French border; little is accomplished, and least of all Hitler's hope to convince Franco to enter the war on the Axis side.
24: After meeting with Franco, Hitler goes to Montoire where a meeting with Philippe Pétain took place signifying the start of organised French collaboration with the Nazi regime.
24: The Italian Air Corps sees its first action during the Battle of Britain.
25: Berlin and Hamburg are bombed heavily.
28: At about 03:00 am the Italian ambassador to Greece issues ultimatum to Greece and Greek Prime Minister Metaxas replies: "So it is war". The Italian Royal Army launches attacks into Greece from Italian-held Albania and begins the Greco-Italian War. Hitler is angered at the initiative of his ally.
29: Very heavy convoy losses during this period as numbers of U-boats increase.
29: The first number drawings for US Selective Service Act draftees.
30: President Roosevelt, in the middle of an election campaign, promises not to send "our boys" to war.
31: The Warsaw District government moves all Jews living in Warsaw to the ghettos.
November
1: Turkey declared neutrality in the Italo-Greek war.[1]
2: The Italian advance into Greece continues. Vovousa is captured and Italian aircraft bomb Salonika.
5: President Roosevelt wins a third term. The British see the event as promising of more help from the US.
5: HMS Jervis Bay, a merchant cruiser, is sunk on convoy duty, but much of the convoy escapes. The loss becomes a media event.
7: It becomes clear that Ireland will refuse to allow the United Kingdom to use its ports as naval bases.
8: The Battle of Elaia–Kalamas ends and the Italians end their futile offensive in Greece.
9: Neville Chamberlain dies.
11: British naval forces launch attack against Italian navy at Taranto. Swordfish bombers from HMS Illustrious damage three battleships, two cruisers and multiple auxiliary craft. The event secures British supply lines in the Mediterranean. The British success will be studied by Japanese military already preparing for an attack on Pearl Harbor.
12: Molotov meets Hitler and Ribbentrop in Berlin. New World order is under discussion. Molotov expresses Soviet interest in Finland, Bulgaria, Romania, Dardanelles and Bosporus, but Hitler talks along broad lines about worldwide spheres of influence between Russia, Germany, Italy and Japan.
12: In the Battle of Gabon, British forces finish wresting central Africa from the Vichy French.
13: Molotov meets Hitler again asking acceptance to liquidate Finland. Hitler now resists every attempt to expand Soviet influence in Europe. He sees Britain as defeated and offers India to the Soviet Union.
: The Battle of Pindus ends in a Greek victory.
14: A heavy night raid on Coventry. Coventry Cathedral is destroyed and the medieval centre of the city is levelled.
: The Greek counter-offensive against the Italians begins.
15: The Soviet Union is invited to join Tripartite Pact and to share in the spoils of British Empire. Warsaw's Jewish ghetto is cordoned off from the rest of the city.
16: Churchill orders some British troops in North Africa to be sent to Greece, despite concerns by his military leaders that they are needed in the current campaign against the Italians in North Africa.
19: The Greeks continue to advance, and evict Italian troops from Greek soil.

The Greek counter-offensive
20: Hungary signs the Tripartite Pact.
21: The Belgian government, in exile in Britain, declares war on Italy.
22: Fall of Korytsa to the Greeks.
23: Romania signs the Tripartite Pact.
24: The Slovak Republic signs the Tripartite Pact.
25: The Soviet Union gives her terms to join the Tripartite Pact including substantial new territorial gains for Russia.
29: A massive overnight bombing raid on Liverpool.
30: A large bombing raid on Southampton in southern England; the city is hit again the next night, followed by Bristol on 2 December, and Birmingham on the 3rd.
December

The state of the Allies and Axis powers in December 1940, showing great Axis expansion in Europe and Northern Africa
1-8: Greek forces continue to drive the Italian armies back, capturing the cities of Pogradec, Sarandë, and Gjirokastër.
1: Bombing raids are exchanged throughout the month between Germany and Britain. First German bombs, then Britain's.
Joseph P. Kennedy, the US Ambassador to the United Kingdom is asked to resign by President Roosevelt after he gives a newspaper interview expressing the view that "Democracy is finished in England".
5: The RAF bombs Düsseldorf and Turin.
6-9: British and Indian troops of the Western Desert Force launch Operation Compass, an offensive against Italian forces in Egypt. The Italians have seven infantry divisions and the Maletti Group in fortified defensive positions. Initial attacks are launched against the five Italian camps around and south of Sidi Barrani. The camps are overrun, Italian General Pietro Maletti is killed, and the Maletti Group, the 1st Libyan Division, the 2nd Libyan Division, and the 4th Blackshirt Division are all but destroyed. The remaining Italian units in Egypt are forced to withdraw towards Libya.
8: Francisco Franco rules out Spanish entry into the war; the immediate result is that Hitler is forced to cancel an attack on Gibraltar.
12: In North Africa, over 39,000 Italians lost or captured in Egypt.
16: The first RAF night raid--on Mannheim, Germany.
: In North Africa, the British are in command at Sollum in Egypt and take Fort Capuzzo in Libya.
18: Hitler issues directive to begin planning for Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union.
22-24: Bombing raids on Manchester.
28: The Greco-Italian War continues to go badly for the Italians and the Greeks hold roughly one-quarter of Albania.
: Italy requests military assistance from Germany against the Greeks.
29: Large German air-raids on London; St Paul's Cathedral is damaged.